+++
date = "2018-03-30"
title = "New Timer implementation"
description = "30 March 2018"
menu = "blog"
weight = 994
+++

Happy Friday all!

To close out a great week, there is a [new release] of Tokio. This release
includes a brand new timer implementation.

## Timers

Sometimes (often), one wants to execute code in relation to time. Maybe a
function needs to run at a specific instant. Maybe a read needs to be limited
to a fixed duration. For working with time, one needs access to a timer!

## Some history

The `tokio-timer` crate has been around for a while. It was originally built
using a [hashed timer wheel][wheel] (pdf warning). It had a granularity of 100
milliseconds, so any timeout set with a resolution of less than 100 milliseconds
would get rounded up. Usually, in the context of network based applications,
this is fine. Timeouts are usually at least 30 seconds and do not require high
precision.

However, there are cases for which 100 milliseconds is too coarse. Also, the
original implementation of Tokio timer had a number of annoying bugs and did not
handle edge cases super well due to the implementation strategy it took.

## A new beginning

The timer has been rewritten from scratch and released as [`tokio-timer`
0.2][2]. For the most part, the API is pretty similar, but implementation is
completely different.

Instead of just using a single hashed timer wheel implementation, it uses a
hierarchical approach (also described in the paper linked above).

The timer uses six separate levels. Each level is a hashed wheel containing 64
slots. Slots in the lowest level represent one millisecond. The
next level up represents 64 milliseconds (1 x 64 slots) and so on. So, a slot on
each level covers an equal amount of time as the entire level below.

When a timeout is set, if it is within 64 milliseconds from the current instant,
it goes in the lowest level. If the timeout is within 64 milliseconds and 4,096
milliseconds, it goes in the second level, and so on.

As time advances, timeouts in the lowest level are fired. Once the end of the
lowest level is reached, all timeouts in the next level up are removed from that
level and moved to the lowest level.

Using this strategy, all timer operations (creating a timeout, canceling a
timeout, firing a timeout) are constant. This results in very good performance
even with a very large number of outstanding timeouts.

## A quick look at the API.

As mentioned above, the API has not really changed. There are three primary
types:

* [`Delay`][delay]: A future that completes at a set instant in time.
* [`Timeout`][timeout]: Decorates a future ensuring it completes before the
  timeout is reached.
* [`Interval`][interval]: A stream that yields values at a fixed intervals.

And a quick example:

```rust
# #![deny(deprecated)]
# extern crate tokio;
#
use tokio::prelude::*;
use tokio::timer::Delay;

use std::time::{Duration, Instant};

fn main() {
    let when = Instant::now() + Duration::from_millis(100);
    let task = Delay::new(when)
        .and_then(|_| {
            println!("Hello world!");
            Ok(())
        })
        .map_err(|e| panic!("delay errored; err={:?}", e));

    tokio::run(task);
}
```

The above example creates a new `Delay` instance that will complete 100
milliseconds in the future. The `new` function takes an `Instant`, so we compute
`when` to be the instant 100 milliseconds from now.

Once the instant is reached, the `Delay` future completes, resulting in the
`and_then` block to be executed.

This release comes with a short [guide] explaining how to use timers and [API
documentation][api].

## Integrated in the Runtime

Using the timer API requires a timer instance to be running. The Tokio [runtime]
takes care of all that setup for you.

When the runtime is started with `tokio::run` or by calling `Runtime::new`
directly, a thread pool is started. Each worker thread will get one timer
instance. So, this means that if the runtime starts 4 worker threads, there will
be 4 timer instances, one per thread. Doing this allows using the timer without
paying a synchronization cost since the timer will be located on the same thread
as the code that uses the various timer types (`Delay`, `Timeout`, `Interval`).

And with that, have a great weekend!

<div style="text-align:right">&mdash;Carl Lerche</div>

[new release]: https://crates.io/crates/tokio/0.1.5
[wheel]: http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~nahum/w6998/papers/sosp87-timing-wheels.pdf
[2]: https://crates.io/crates/tokio-timer/0.2.0
[delay]: https://docs.rs/tokio/0.1/tokio/timer/struct.Delay.html
[timeout]: https://docs.rs/tokio/0.1/tokio/timer/struct.Timeout.html
[interval]: https://docs.rs/tokio/0.1/tokio/timer/struct.Interval.html
[guide]: {{< ref "/docs/going-deeper/timers.md" >}}
[api]: https://docs.rs/tokio/0.1/tokio/timer/index.html
[runtime]: {{< api-url "tokio" >}}/runtime/index.html
