---
date: "2019-12-17"
title: "Announcing Mio 0.7-alpha.1"
description: "December 17th, 2019"
---

We are excited to announce [Thomas de Zeeuw][thomasdezeeuw] as the new lead of
Mio. Mio is the low level I/O portability abstraction that backs Tokio and other
Rust projects. Thomas has been behind most of the Mio 0.7 effort and will be
continuing to lead the crate to 1.0. He has written the rest of the
announcement.

[thomasdezeeuw]: https://github.com/Thomasdezeeuw

---

Mio 0.7 is the work of [various contributors] over the course of roughly half a
year. Compared to Mio version 0.6, version 0.7 reduces the size of the provided
API in an attempt to simplify the implementation and usage. The API version 0.7
will be close to the proposed API for a future version 1.0. The scope of the
crate was reduced to providing a cross-platform event notification mechanism and
commonly used types such as cross-thread poll waking and non-blocking networking
I/O primitives.

[various contributors]:
  https://github.com/tokio-rs/mio/graphs/contributors?from=2019-03-01&to=2019-12-13

# Major changes

Since this is a large release only some highlights are described here, all
changes can be found in the [change log]. Overall a large number of API changes
have been made to reduce the complexity of the implementation and remove
overhead where possible.

[change log]:
  https://github.com/tokio-rs/mio/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#070-alpha1

## Wrapping native OS types

In version 0.6, Mio defined its own `Event` structure to which the native OS
types were converted. This meant that after polling the native types (i.e.
`kevent` or `epoll_event` structures) would be converted into Mio's `Event`
type. In version 0.7, the `Event` was changed to simply be a type wrapper around
`kevent` or `epoll_event`, which provides convenience methods to get the event
readiness indicators (such as readable or writable). Similar changes have been
made throughout the crate. For example `Poll` is now just a file descriptor on
Unix.

The way events are handled using the `Events` struct has also changed. In
version 0.6.10, index access was already deprecated and replaced with an
iteration API. The index access was completely removed in version 0.7, and the
iteration API was changed to return a reference to `Event` rather than making a
copy. All methods on `Event` only need a reference, so this shouldn't be a
problem.

## Removal of the user space queue & deprecated types

Mio version 0.6 had a user space queue, available through the `SetReadiness` and
`Registration` types, but this has been removed in version 0.7 as it was deemed
to be outside of the scope for Mio. Users who need a user space queue can use
one of the queue types found in the [crossbeam] crate.

One use case for the user space queue was to wake a polling thread (i.e. calling
`Poll::poll`) from another thread. To support this use case, a new `Waker` type
has been introduced. Calling `Waker::wake` will wake the associated `Poll`.

[crossbeam]: https://crates.io/crates/crossbeam

## Registering & I/O resource usages changes

By far the biggest user facing change of version 0.7 is the way Mio registers
I/O sources. In version 0.6 resources were registered using `Token`, `Ready`,
and `PollOpt` arguments. For example the following code would register `socket`
with readable interests and edge triggers.

```rust
poll.register(&socket, Token(0), Ready::readable(), PollOpt::edge())?;
```

As mentioned above the `Event` type was changed to be a wrapper around the
native OS type. In turn this removed the `Ready` type in favour of having
methods on `Event` to check for the readiness indicators and getting the
`Token`. The `Ready` type, as used in registration, was changed to `Interest` to
better reflect its usage. The API of `Interest` was also changed to take
advantage of the (somewhat) new associated constants, ensuring that is no longer
possible to register an event source with empty interests.

In version 0.7 Mio registers all sources with edge triggers, removing the need
for `PollOpt`. The use of edge triggers is explained below.

The trait that defined how to register an event source in version 0.6 was called
`Evented`. This was changed to `Source` and is now referred to as
`event::Source`, as the type lives inside the `event` module. `event::Source`
has the same three methods as `Evented`: `register`, `reregister`, and
`deregister` but are changed as described above.

Finally the registration functions have moved from `Poll` to a new `Registry`
type which can be `try_clone`d and used to register sources from different
threads. All together that means registering the same `socket` with readable
interests now looks like this:

```rust
poll.registry().register(&socket, Token(0), Interest::READABLE)?;
```

## Moving to edge triggers

As already mentioned Mio now registers all I/O sources with edge triggers which
means that users of one-shot and level trigger need to change how they respond
to events.

A problem is that certain uses of level and one-shot triggers show differences
between OSes that Mio can't cancel without unacceptable overhead. We want Mio to
present a nice cross-platform experience, so we decided to make all I/O sources
edge-triggered. This way the behavior is identical on all platforms.

Users that previously used one-shot triggers should now `deregister` the I/O
source after receiving an event.

Users of level triggers basically need to put a loop around all I/O operations.
When using edge triggers the user is required to perform I/O after receiving an
event. For example, in response to a read event, the user must read from the I/O
source until it would block (it returns an `io::Error` of kind
`io::ErrorKind::WouldBlock`). Only once an operation returns a `WouldBlock`
error will Mio report any more events for that `Interest` on that I/O source.
Below is an example of how to read from a `TcpStream` using edge triggers.

```rust
let stream: TcpStream = ...;

// When we polled we received a readable event for our `TcpStream`.

let mut buf = [0; 4096];
// With edge triggers we need to read all data available on the socket.
loop {
    let bytes_read = match stream.read(&mut buf) {
        // Read successful, proceed like normal.
        Ok(bytes_read) => bytes_read,
        // No more data to read at the moment. We will receive another event
        // once more data is available to read.
        Err(ref err) if err.kind() == io::ErrorKind::WouldBlock => break,
        // Got interrupted, try again.
        Err(ref err) if err.kind() == io::ErrorKind::Interrupted => continue,
        // Hit an actual error.
        Err(err) => return Err(err),
    };

    process_byte(&buf[0..bytes_read]);
}
```

**Note**: this needs to happen for all I/O operations on registered event
sources so be careful when using automated tools to convert to the new register
API.

## Addition of Unix socket API

New in the `net` module are the `UnixListener`, `UnixStream` and `UnixDatagram`
types that support Unix sockets with an API similar to that found in the
standard library.

These APIs are currently only support on Unix based OSes.

## Removal of deprecated API

In Mio version 0.6 various types, such as the old event loop related and channel
types, were deprecated. In version 0.7 all deprecated type were removed.

## Removed support for OSes

Support for the following OSes has been dropped:

- Linux below version 2.6.27 (and glibc 2.9), we are using newer APIs not
  present on older Linux versions, specifically `eventfd(2)`, `SOCK_NONBLOCK`
  and `SOCK_CLOEXEC` options in `socket(2)` and `epoll_create1(2)`.
- Fuchsia: didn't have any CI coverage and we don't have enough maintainers to
  properly support it.
- Bitrig: development on the OS seems to have stopped and rustc no longer
  supports it.

## Increased minimum supported Rust version

As of writing this the minimum supported Rust version is 1.36. For version 1.0
we aim to target [Rust version 1.39], as this is the version in which `async`
become stable (a major feature which a lot of our dependent crates are using).
So keep those compilers up to date!

[rust version 1.39]: https://blog.rust-lang.org/2019/11/07/Rust-1.39.0.html

# Maintainer changes

Apart from code, we have also made some management changes. The repository has
moved to the [Tokio organization] and multiple new people have joined the team.

[tokio organization]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/mio

<div style="text-align:right">&mdash;Thomas de Zeeuw</div>
