+++
date = "2019-12-18"
title = "Announcing Tokio-Compat"
description = "December 18, 2019"
menu = "blog"
weight = 983
+++

The [release][release-02] of Tokio 0.2 was the culmination of a great deal of
hard work from numerous contributors, and has brought several significant
improvements to Tokio. Using `std::future` and async/await makes writing async
code using Tokio [much more ergonomic][await], and a new scheduler
implementation makes Tokio 0.2's thread pool [as much as 10x faster][10x].
However, updating existing Tokio 0.1 projects to use 0.2 and `std::future` poses
some new challenges. Therefore, we're very excited to announce the release of
the `tokio-compat` crate to help ease this transition, by providing a runtime
compatible with both Tokio 0.1 and Tokio 0.2 futures.

You can find `tokio-compat` on [crates.io] and on [GitHub].

[crates.io]: https://crates.io/crates/tokio-compat
[GitHub]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio-compat

## Motivation

Both the transition from `futures` 0.1 to `std::future` and the breaking changes
to Tokio's APIs in 0.2 have made it [challenging] to update existing projects to
benefit from the variety of improvements Tokio 0.2 offers. Additionally, these
breaking changes make it difficult for projects to migrate incrementally:
instead, they must do so all at once, requiring a lot of effort and sometimes
putting other work on hold until the migration is complete. In order to enable
incremental migration, we need a compatibility layer that allows us to use code
written against both the legacy Tokio 0.1/`futures` 0.1 APIs _and_ the new Tokio
0.2/`std::future` APIs in the same project.

The `futures` crate's [`compat` module][futures-compat] provides
interoperability between `futures` 0.1 and `std::future` _future types_, such as
implementing `std::future::Future` for a type that implements the `futures` 0.1
`Future` This is a foundational part of the compatibility story, but, on its
own, it is insufficient to allow most projects to be incrementally updated. Most
code using Tokio relies on the _runtime services_ that Tokio provides. These
runtime services include the ability to spawn other tasks; the I/O driver, which
allows tasks to be notified by the operating system's async I/O APIs, and the
timer. Futures which rely on Tokio 0.1's runtime services will panic when they
try to access those runtime services (such as by spawning a task or creating a
timer) on the Tokio 0.2 runtime, even if they are converted to the
`std::future::Future` trait. This is because the new runtime does not provide
these services in a way compatible with Tokio 0.1's APIs.

The `tokio-compat` crate helps to bridge this gap by providing a _compatibility
runtime_, which provides runtime services compatible with both Tokio 0.1 _and_
Tokio 0.2. For example, using `tokio-compat`, we can write code like this:

```rust
use futures_01::future::lazy;

tokio_compat::run(lazy(|| {
    // spawn a `futures` 0.1 future using the `spawn` function from the
    // `tokio` 0.1 crate:
    tokio_01::spawn(lazy(|| {
        println!("hello from tokio 0.1!");
        Ok(())
    }));

    // spawn an `async` block future on the same runtime using `tokio`
    // 0.2's `spawn`:
    tokio_02::spawn(async {
        println!("hello from tokio 0.2!");
    });

    Ok(())
}))
```

Similarly, we can run tasks that rely on both the 0.1 and 0.2 versions of
runtime services like the timer and I/O driver:

```rust
use std::time::{Duration, Instant};
use tokio_compat::prelude::*;

tokio_compat::run_std(async {
    // Wait for a `tokio` 0.1 `Delay`...
    let when = Instant::now() + Duration::from_millis(10);
    tokio_01::timer::Delay::new(when)
        // convert the delay future into a `std::future` that we can `await`.
        .compat()
        .await
        .expect("tokio 0.1 timer should work!");
    println!("10 ms have elapsed");

    // Wait for a `tokio` 0.2 `Delay`...
    tokio_02::time::delay_for(Duration::from_millis(20)).await;
    println!("20 ms have elapsed");
});
```

[release-02]: ../2019-11-tokio-0-2/
[await]: ../2019-11-tokio-0-2/#async-await
[10x]: ../2019-10-scheduler/
[challenging]: https://users.rust-lang.org/t/failed-to-port-mononoke-to-tokio-0-2-experience-report/32478
[futures-compat]: https://docs.rs/futures/0.3.1/futures/compat/index.html

## Using `tokio-compat`

Primary use-cases for `tokio-compat` include:

* **Incrementally migrating applications**: Updating a large project to use
  new APIs is challenging. This kind of change is often much easier when it can
  be made gradually module-by-module, or by requiring that _new_ code added to
  the project use new APIs and slowly rewriting existing code as it's changed
  for other reasons. Due to the incompatibility between 0.1 and 0.2 runtimes,
  however, this isn't really possible for most projects. Instead, it's necessary
  to update everything all at once, requiring a single large change that can
  often hold up other work. `tokio-compat` can allow projects to migrate
  incrementally instead.
* **Using legacy libraries in new code**: If a new project that uses Tokio 0.2
  needs functionality from a library written against 0.1, its authors are faced
  with a variety of choices, none of which are particularly good. They can block
  the progress of their features on the dependency being rewritten to use 0.2,
  which can take a long time; they can rewrite _their_ project to use 0.1,
  giving up all the advantages of async/await and likely requiring _another_
  rewrite when the dependency is updated; or they can take on the responsibility
  of updating the dependency themselves. With `tokio-compat`, however, it is
  possible to use futures from libraries that expect Tokio 0.1 on the same
  runtime as Tokio 0.2 futures.

In all these cases, `tokio-compat` is hopefully a temporary necessity: ideally,
most code should transition to using async/await, `std::future`, and Tokio 0.2.
Although we've worked hard to make the compatibility layer as lightweight as
possible, it is, by definition, an additional source of complexity in the
system. Furthermore, async/await offers significant ergonomics advantages, and
code using it is easier to understand and modify, so most projects will benefit
greatly from moving to it. The role of `tokio-compat` is to make this transition
easier and more incremental.

### Getting Started

The APIs provided by `tokio-compat` are intended as a drop-in replacement for
`tokio` 0.1's APIs. The [runtimes] provided by `tokio-compat` expose functions
with the same names and signatures as Tokio 0.1's runtimes. Therefore, in many
cases, getting started with `tokio-compat` is as simple as adding

```toml
tokio-compat = { version = "0.1", features = ["rt-full"] }
```

to your Cargo.toml, and changing import and paths referencing `tokio` 0.1's
`Runtime` module to `tokio_compat`'s. So, for example,

```rust
tokio::runtime::run(future);
```

becomes

```rust
tokio_compat::runtime::run(future);
```

Similarly,

```rust
use tokio::runtime::Runtime;

let mut rt = Runtime::new().unwrap();

rt.spawn(future);

rt.shutdown_on_idle()
    .wait()
    .unwrap();
```

becomes

```rust
use tokio_compat::runtime::Runtime;

let mut rt = Runtime::new().unwrap();

rt.spawn(future);

rt.shutdown_on_idle()
    .wait()
    .unwrap();
```

Only the `tokio::runtime` module and `tokio::run` function need to be replaced
with `tokio-compat`'s versions. Other APIs exposed by Tokio 0.1, such as
`tokio::net`, will work properly on the compatibility runtime (with some
exceptions we'll discuss shortly). When running on the compatibility runtime,
code which spawns `futures` 0.1 tasks via `tokio` 0.1's `spawn` function will
work, as will code that spawns `std::future` tasks via `tokio` 0.2's `spawn`.

Additionally, the `tokio-compat` runtimes, `TaskExecutor`s, and other types
_also_ provide `std::future`-compatible methods. For example, the [`Runtime`]
has both a `spawn`, which spawns 0.1 futures, and a `spawn_std`, which spawns a
`std::future` future (or an `async` function/block). See [this
section][spawning] in the `tokio-compat` API docs for details on spawning.

Once a project is running on the compatibility runtime, it's easy to gradually
migrate to `std::future` and async/await. One option is to simply perform a
"one to one" translation of the existing codebase: for example, types
implementing `futures::future::Future` are rewritten to implement
`std::future::Future`, code using future combinators is changed to use the
`futures` 0.3 versions of those combinators, and so on. In many cases, the
required changes are fairly mechanical, e.g. changing imports, renaming
`Async::NotReady` to `Poll::Pending`, et cetera. However, the `Pin<&mut Self>`
receiver type for `std::future::Future`'s `poll` method can make migrating
manual `Future` implementations challenging. Crates such as [`pin-project`] can
be helpful when dealing with the stack pinning requirement.

In most cases, however, it is often significantly easier to rewrite the existing
code to use async/await syntax, rather than implementing `Future` by hand or
using future combinators. Although such a change is larger when measured in
terms of how many lines of code were modified, the ergonomic benefits of
async/await syntax can make the migration much easier &mdash; oftentimes, a
large amount of boilerplate code can simply be removed. Furthermore, this
has the benefit of resulting in more idiomatic, readable, and maintainable code.
For most projects, switching to use async/await syntax is the recommended
migration path.

[runtimes]: https://docs.rs/tokio-compat/0.1.0/tokio_compat/runtime/index.html
[`Runtime`]: https://docs.rs/tokio-compat/0.1.0/tokio_compat/runtime/struct.Runtime.html
[spawning]: https://docs.rs/tokio-compat/0.1.0/tokio_compat/runtime/index.html#spawning
[`pin-project`]: https://crates.io/crates/pin-project

### Notes

There are a small number of "gotchas" to keep in mind in the current
`tokio-compat` v0.1. In particular, it is important to note that he
compatibility thread pool runtime does **not** currently support the
`tokio` 0.1 [`tokio_threadpool::blocking`][blocking] API. Calls to the
legacy version of `blocking` made on the compatibility runtime will currently
fail. In the future, `tokio-compat` will allow transparently replacing
legacy `blocking` with the `tokio` 0.2 blocking APIs, but in the meantime,
it will be necessary to convert this code to call into the `tokio` 0.2
[`task::block_in_place`] and [`task::spawn_blocking`] APIs instead. Since
[`tokio::fs`] relies on the blocking APIs, the Tokio 0.1 version of `tokio::fs`
also will not currently work on the compatibility runtime. See
[here][blocking-compat] for details.

Additionally, it's important to keep in mind that Tokio 0.1 and Tokio 0.2
provide subtly different behavior around spawning tasks and shutting down
runtimes. In particular, Tokio 0.1 tracks whether a runtime is idle (i.e., it
has no futures running on it), and provides a `Runtime::shutdown_on_idle` method
which shuts down the runtime when it becomes idle. On the other hand, Tokio
0.2's `spawn` functions return `JoinHandle`s, which can be used to await the
completion of spawned tasks, and users are instead expected to await these
`JoinHandles` in order to determine when the runtime should shut down.
Therefore, `tokio-compat` provides both APIs, but it is important to note that
only tasks spawned _without_ `JoinHandle`s "count" against the runtime being
considered idle. See [this section][idle] in the documentation for details.

[blocking]: https://docs.rs/tokio-threadpool/0.1.16/tokio_threadpool/fn.blocking.html
[`task::block_in_place`]: https://docs.rs/tokio/0.2.4/tokio/task/fn.block_in_place.html
[`task::spawn_blocking`]: https://docs.rs/tokio/0.2.4/tokio/task/fn.spawn_blocking.html
[`tokio::fs`]: https://docs.rs/tokio/0.1.22/tokio/fs/index.html
[blocking-compat]: https://docs.rs/tokio-compat/0.1.0/tokio_compat/runtime/index.html#blocking
[idle]: https://docs.rs/tokio-compat/0.1.0/tokio_compat/runtime/index.html#shutting-down

## Case Study: Vector

[Vector] is a high-performance observability data router for collecting and
transforming logs, metrics, and events. Vector is a production application that
relies on the Tokio runtime, and currently depends on Tokio 0.1.

After switching Vector from Tokio 0.1 to Tokio 0.2, its maintainers observed
significant performance improvements in benchmarks:

| benchmark group             | time (0.1)   | thoughput (0.1)  | time (0.2)    | throughput (0.2) | speedup |
|-----------------------------|-------------:|-----------------:|--------------:|-----------------:|--------:|
| batch 10mb with 2mb batches |   5.5±0.14ms | 1732.8 MB/s      | 5.1±0.15ms    |1864.0 MB/s       | x 1.08  |
| buffers/in-memory           | 199.3±2.35ms |   47.8 MB/s      | 99.6±4.40ms   |   95.7 MB/s      | x 2.00  |
| http/http_gzip              | 191.1±3.17ms |   49.9 MB/s      | 94.3±6.24ms   |  101.1 MB/s      | x 2.03  |
| http/http_no_compression    | 191.8±4.68ms |   49.7 MB/s      | 91.2±2.56ms   |  104.6 MB/s      | x 2.10  |
| interconnected              | 238.7±5.66ms |   79.9 MB/s      | 209.7±5.32ms  |   91.0 MB/s      | x 1.14  |
| pipe                        | 198.4±0.60ms |   48.1 MB/s      | 106.0±6.52ms  |   90.0 MB/s      | x 1.87  |
| pipe_with_many_writers      |131.7±12.56ms |   72.4 MB/s      | 150.7±10.56ms |   63.3 MB/s      | x 0.86  |
| pipe_with_tiny_lines        | 165.7±0.77ms |  589.2 KB/s      | 84.1±0.66ms   | 1161.4 KB/s      | x 1.97  |
| transforms                  | 275.7±3.28ms |   38.0 MB/s      | 167.5±8.07ms  |   62.6 MB/s      | x 1.65  |

Note how in many of these benchmarks, the Tokio 0.2 version (using
`tokio-compat`) was as much as two times faster than the Tokio 0.1 version,
simply by changing the Tokio runtime used.

The surface area of the change necessary to update Vector to use the
compatibility runtime is also quite minimal. Here's the full diff:

```diff
diff --git a/src/runtime.rs b/src/runtime.rs
index 07005a7d..4d64a106 100644
--- a/src/runtime.rs
+++ b/src/runtime.rs
@@ -1,15 +1,16 @@
 use futures::future::{ExecuteError, Executor, Future};
+use futures_util::future::{FutureExt, TryFutureExt};
 use std::io;
-use tokio::runtime::Builder;
+use tokio_compat::runtime::Builder;

 pub struct Runtime {
-    rt: tokio::runtime::Runtime,
+    rt: tokio_compat::runtime::Runtime,
 }

 impl Runtime {
     pub fn new() -> io::Result<Self> {
         Ok(Runtime {
-            rt: tokio::runtime::Runtime::new()?,
+            rt: tokio_compat::runtime::Runtime::new()?,
         })
     }

@@ -47,17 +48,17 @@ impl Runtime {
     }

     pub fn shutdown_on_idle(self) -> impl Future<Item = (), Error = ()> {
-        self.rt.shutdown_on_idle()
+        self.rt.shutdown_on_idle().unit_error().boxed().compat()
     }

     pub fn shutdown_now(self) -> impl Future<Item = (), Error = ()> {
-        self.rt.shutdown_now()
+        self.rt.shutdown_now().unit_error().boxed().compat()
     }
 }

 #[derive(Clone, Debug)]
 pub struct TaskExecutor {
-    inner: tokio::runtime::TaskExecutor,
+    inner: tokio_compat::runtime::TaskExecutor,
 }

 impl TaskExecutor {
@@ -71,6 +72,7 @@ where
     F: Future<Item = (), Error = ()> + Send + 'static,
 {
     fn execute(&self, future: F) -> Result<(), ExecuteError<F>> {
-        self.inner.execute(future)
+        self.inner.spawn(future);
+        Ok(())
     }
 }
diff --git a/src/sinks/kafka.rs b/src/sinks/kafka.rs
index 1b99328b..880374b2 100644
--- a/src/sinks/kafka.rs
+++ b/src/sinks/kafka.rs
@@ -6,7 +6,7 @@ use crate::{
     topology::config::{DataType, SinkConfig, SinkContext, SinkDescription},
 };
 use futures::{
-    future::{self, poll_fn, IntoFuture},
+    future::{self, IntoFuture},
     stream::FuturesUnordered,
     Async, AsyncSink, Future, Poll, Sink, StartSend, Stream,
 };
@@ -213,18 +213,14 @@ impl Sink for KafkaSink {
 fn healthcheck(config: KafkaSinkConfig) -> super::Healthcheck {
     let consumer: BaseConsumer = config.to_rdkafka().unwrap().create().unwrap();

-    let check = poll_fn(move || {
-        tokio_threadpool::blocking(|| {
-            consumer
-                .fetch_metadata(Some(&config.topic), Duration::from_secs(3))
-                .map(|_| ())
-                .map_err(|err| err.into())
-        })
-    })
-    .map_err(|err| err.into())
-    .and_then(|result| result.into_future());
+    let task = tokio02::task::block_in_place(|| {
+        consumer
+            .fetch_metadata(Some(&config.topic), Duration::from_secs(3))
+            .map(|_| ())
+            .map_err(|err| err.into())
+    });

-    Box::new(check)
+    Box::new(task.into_future())
 }
```

(thanks to [@LucioFranco] for trying out `tokio-compat` in Vector!)

[Vector]: https://vector.dev
[@LucioFranco]: https://github.com/LucioFranco

## Conclusion

Many major open-source projects have been using Tokio since the `tokio-core`
days. Asynchronous programming in Rust has come incredibly far since then, and
we hope `tokio-compat` makes it easy for all Tokio users to start seeing
benefits from the new `std::future`/Tokio 0.2 ecosystem as painlessly as
possible. Of course, as with all 0.1 releases, there's still more to do,
including:

* Seamless support for `tokio-threadpool` 0.1's [`blocking`] APIs
* A compatibility layer for `tokio-io` 0.1's [`AsyncRead` and `AsyncWrite`
  traits][async-io]
* Reimplementations of APIs from Tokio 0.1 that were removed in 0.2
* The obligatory bug fixes and performance improvements

You can find the `tokio-compat` repository [on GitHub][github]. As always, we
would love feedback and contributions from the Tokio community. If you need
help, or want to discuss `tokio-compat` details, please [join us on
Discord][discord] &mdash; all are welcome!

[async-io]: https://docs.rs/tokio-io/0.1.12/tokio_io/#traits
[`blocking`]: https://docs.rs/tokio-threadpool/0.1.17/tokio_threadpool/fn.blocking.html
[github]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio-compat
[discord]: https://discord.gg/6yGkFeN

<div style="text-align:right">&mdash; Eliza Weisman (<a href="https://github.com/hawkw">@hawkw</a>)</div>
