+++
date = "2019-11-03"
title = "Announcing Mio 0.7 alpha 1"
description = "November 3, 2019"
menu = "blog"
weight = 985
+++


Mio 0.7 is the work of [various contributors] over the course of roughly half a
year. Compared to Mio version 0.6 version 0.7 reduces the size of the provided
API in an attempt to simply the implementation and usage. The API version 0.7
will be close to the proposed API for a future version 1.0. The scope for the
crate was reduced to providing a cross-platform event notification mechanism and
commonly used types such as cross-thread poll waking and non-blocking networking
I/O primitives.

<!-- TODO: not sure if this is correct timeline. -->
[various contributors]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/mio/graphs/contributors?from=2019-03-01&to=2019-11-03&type=c


## Major changes

Since this is a large release only some highlights are described here, all
changes can be found in the [change log]. Overall a large number of API changes
have been made to reduce the complexity of the implementation and remove
overhead were possible.

<!-- TODO: link to v0.7 in the changelog. -->
<!-- TODO: also write the changelog. -->
[change log]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/mio/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md


### Wrapping native OS types

In version 0.6 Mio defined it's own `Event` structure to which the native OS
types where converted. This meant that after polling the native types (i.e.
`kqueue` or `epoll_event` structures) would be converted into Mio's `Event`
type. In version 0.7 the `Event` was changed to simply be a type wrapper around
`kqueue` or `epoll_event` and provides convenience methods to get the event
readiness indicators such as readable or writable. Similar changes have been
made throughout the crate, for example `Poll` is now just a file descriptor on
Unix.

Handling of events in the `Events` has also changed. In version 0.6.10 index
access was already deprecated and replaced with an iteration API. The index
access was completely removed in version 0.7 and the iteration API was changed
to return a reference to `Event` rather then making a copy, but since all
methods on `Event` only need a reference this shouldn't be a problem.


### Removal of the user space queue & deprecated types

Mio version 0.6 had a user space queue, available through the `SetReadiness` and
`Registration` types, but this has been removed in version 0.7 as it was deemed
to be outside of the scope for Mio. Users who need a user space queue can use
one of the queue types found in the [crossbeam] crate.

One use case the user space queue support was waking a thread polling (i.e.
calling `Poll::poll`) from another thread. To support this use case a new
`Waker` type was introduced to do exactly this job, calling `Waker::wake` will
wake the `Poll` it is associated with.

[crossbeam]: https://crates.io/crates/crossbeam


### Registering & I/O resource usages changes

By far the biggest user facing change of version 0.7 is the way Mio registers
I/O sources. In version 0.6 resource would be registered using a `Token`,
`Ready` interests and `PollOpt`ions. For example the following code would register
`socket` with readable interests and edge triggers.

```rust
poll.register(&socket, Token(0), Ready::readable(), PollOpt::edge())?;
```

As mentioned above the `Event` type was changed to be a wrapper around the
native OS type, in turn this removed the `Ready` type in favour of having
methods on `Event` to check for the readiness indicators and getting the
`Token`. The `Ready` type, as used in registering, was changed to `Interests` to
better reflect its usage. The API of `Interests` was also changed to take
advanced of the (somewhat) new associated constants, ensuring that is no longer
possible to register an event source with empty interests.

In version 0.7 Mio registers all source with edge triggers, removing the need
for `PollOpt`. How to use edge triggers is explained below.

The trait that defined how to register an event source in version 0.6 was called
`Evented`, this was changed to `Source` and is now referenced to as
`event::Source`, as the type lives inside the `event` module. The same three
methods live on the trait but are changed as described above.

Finally the register functions have moved from `Poll` to a new `Registry` type
which can be `try_clone`d and used to register sources from different threads.
All together that means registering the same `socket` with readable interests
now looks like this:

```rust
poll.registry().register(&socket, Token(0), Interests::READABLE)?;
```


#### Moving to edge triggers

As already mentioned Mio now registers all I/O source with edge triggers which
means that users of one-shot and level trigger need to change how they respond
to events.

The problem was that certain usages of level and one-shot triggers showed
differences in OSes that Mio couldn't, without introducing a lot of overhead,
smooth over to make Mio a nice cross-platform experience. Instead we decided to
change all triggers to be edge triggers, which perform the same way on all
platforms.

Users that previously used one-shot triggers should now `deregister` the I/O
source if they no longer want to receive events for it. And once more events are
wanted the resource should be `register`ed again.

Users that used level triggers basically need to put a loop around all I/O
operations. When using edge triggers the user is responsible for attempting the
I/O operation, e.g. a `read`, until it returns a would block error (an
`io::Error` of kind `io::ErrorKind::WouldBlock`). Only once an operation
returned a would block error the source will receive more events for that kind
of operation. Below is a sample example of how to read from a `TcpStream` using
edge triggers.

```rust
let stream: TcpStream = ...;

// After we polled we received an readable event for our `TcpStream`.

let mut buf = [0; 4096];
// With edge triggers we need to read all data available on the socket.
loop {
    let bytes_read = match stream.read(&mut buf) {
        // Read successful, proceed like normal.
        Ok(bytes_read) => bytes_read,
        // No more data to read at the moment. Now we will receive another event
        // once more data is available to read.
        Err(ref err) if err.kind() == io::ErrorKind::WouldBlock => break,
        // Got interrupted, try again.
        Err(ref err) if err.kind() == io::ErrorKind::Interrupted => continue,
        // Hit an actual error.
        Err(err) => return Err(err),
    };

    process_byte(&buf[0..bytes_read]);
}
```

**Note**: this needs to happen for all I/O operations on registered event source
so be careful when using automated tools to convert to the new register API.


### Addition of Unix socket API

New in the `net` module are the `UnixListener`, `UnixStream` and `UnixDatagram`
types that support Unix sockets with an API similar to that found in the
standard library.

These APIs are currently only support on Unix based OSes.


### Removal of deprecated API

In Mio version 0.6 various types, such as the old event loop related and channel
types, were deprecated. In version 0.7 all deprecated type were removed.


### Removed support for OSes

Support for the following OSes is dropped:

 * Linux below version 4, we using newer APIs not present on old Linux versions.
 * Fuchsia, didn't have any CI coverage and we don't have enough maintainers to
   properly support it.
 * Bitrig, development on the OS seems to have stopped and rustc no longer
   supports it.

<!-- TODO: refer to a document that specifies supported OS and versions? -->


### Increased minimum Rust version

As of writing this the minimum Rust version is increased to 1.36, for version
1.0 we aimed to target the same Rustc version in which async becomes stable (as
this is major feature for which a lot of crates that dependent on this crate
have been waiting). Again at the time writing this seems to be Rust 1.39, so
keep those compilers up to date!


## Maintainer changes

Outside of change to the code changes have also been made to the maintaining
structure. The repository has moved to the [Tokio organisation] and multiple
people joined the team to maintain the code.

[Tokio organisation]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/mio

<div style="text-align:right">&mdash;Thomas de Zeeuw</div>
